## Sequence models

Early neural network models primarily used hand-engineered sequence features as input to a fully connected neural network [@doi:10.1093/nar/gku1058; @doi:10.1126/science.1254806].
As convolutional neural network (CNN) approaches matured for image processing and computer vision, researchers were able to use similar ideas to leverage raw biological sequence proximity in modeling.
CNNs are a neural network variant in which data is grouped by spatial proximity to extract features for prediction.
The definition of "spatial proximity" is specific to the input.
For example, in images nearby pixels might be grouped, or in genomic sequences nearby base pairs might be grouped.

These approaches work by first encoding input into a numeric matrix (for DNA "one-hot" encoding is often used: A=[1,0,0,0], C=[0,1,0,0], G=[0,0,1,0], T=[0,0,0,1]), then applying spatial filters to the encoded input.
In this way, CNNs are able to consider context without making strong assumptions about exactly how much context is needed or how it should be encoded; the data informs the encoding.
A detailed description of how CNNs are applied to sequence data can be found in [@doi:10.15252/msb.20156651].

### Applications in regulatory biology

Many of the first applications of deep learning to biological sequence data were in regulatory biology.
Example early applications of CNNs on sequence data include prediction of binding protein sequence specificity from DNA or RNA sequence [@doi:10.1038/nbt.3300], prediction of variant effects from noncoding DNA sequence [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.3547], and prediction of chromatin accessibility from DNA sequence [@doi:10.1101/gr.200535.115].

Recent sequence models take advantage of hardware advances and methodological innovation to incorporate more sequence context and rely on fewer modeling assumptions.
BPNet, a CNN used to predict transcription factor binding profiles from raw DNA sequences, was able to accurately map known locations of binding motifs in mouse embryonic stem cells [@doi:10.1101/737981].
The BPNet model considers 1000 base pairs of context around each position when predicting binding probabilities, which is important because motif spacing and periodicity can influence protein function.
cDeepbind [@doi:10.1101/345140] combines RNA sequences with information about secondary structure to predict RNA binding protein affinities.
Its convolutional model acts on a feature vector combining sequence and structural information, simultaneously using context for both to inform predictions.
APARENT [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2019.04.046] is a CNN used to predict alternative polyadenylation (APA) from a training set of over 3 million synthetic APA reporter sequences.

Models that consider sequence context have also been applied to impute and make predictions from epigenetic data.
DeepSignal [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btz276] is a CNN that uses contextual electrical signals from Oxford Nanopore single-molecule sequencing data to predict 5mC or 6mA DNA methylation status.
MRCNN [@doi:10.1186/s12864-019-5488-5] uses sequences of length 400, centered at CpG sites, to predict 5mC methylation status.
Deep learning models have also been used to predict gene expression from histone modifications [@doi:10.1101/329334; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty612].
In this case, a neural network model consisting of long short-term memory (LSTM) units was used to encode the long-distance interactions of histone marks in both the 3' and 5' genomic directions.

### Applications in variant calling and mutation detection

* 10.1038/nbt.4235 (actually works on images of read pileups, but uses sequence context)
* 10.1038/s41467-019-09025-z (single molecule sequencing: PacBio/ONT, works on featurization of sequence
  defined in paper, outperforms ^ on these)
* 10.1101/097469 (similar to DeepVariant, but works on raw sequences rather than images,
  \+ less preprocessing/claims to learn more info directly from sequences)
* 10.1101/601450 (calling of short indels using sequence information)
* 10.1038/s41467-019-09027-x (mutation detection in tumors)

### Applications in CRISPR guide selection

* 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005807 (shows that a wide variety of sequence attributes
  are useful for predicting cleavage efficiency, didn't use contextual info?)
* 10.1038/nbt.3437, 10.1038/s41551-017-0178-6 (models for predicting on-target efficacy
  and off-target effects, uses contextual info about sequence i.e. order 2+ features)
* 10.1038/nbt.4061 (CNN-based model for Cpf1 activity prediction,
  convolutions of length 5 on one-hot encoded sequence)
* 10.1186/s13059-018-1459-4 (similar to ^ but for Cas9, also uses ChIP-seq
  data)
* 10.1101/636472 (similar to ^)
* 10.1093/bioinformatics/bty554 (similar to above algorithms but for
  off-target predictions, need to read in more detail)
* 10.1101/505602 (uses STRING -> gene network-based features, in addition
  to sequence features, for on-target efficacy prediction)
