## Network- and pathway-based models

Rather than operating on raw DNA sequence, many machine learning models in biomedicine operate on inputs without an intrinsic order.
For instance, models may make use of gene expression data matrices (e.g. from RNA sequencing or microarray experiments), where each row represents a sample and each column a gene.
When modeling data that is indexed by gene, one might incorporate knowledge that describes the relationships or correlations between genes, in an effort to take these relationships into account when making predictions or generating a low-dimensional representation of the data.
This is comparable to the manner in which sequence context encourages models to consider nearby base pairs similarly.

### Applications in transcriptomics

Models that take gene expression data as input can benefit from incorporating gene-level relationships.
One form that this knowledge commonly takes is a database of gene sets, which may represent biological pathways or gene signatures related to a biological state of interest.
PLIER [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0456-1] uses gene set information from MSigDB [@doi:10.1073/pnas.0506580102] and cell type markers to extract a representation of whole blood gene expression data that corresponds to biological processes and reduces technical noise.
The resulting gene set-aligned representation was used to perform accurate cell type mixture decomposition.
MultiPLIER [@doi:10.1016/j.cels.2019.04.003] applied the PLIER framework to the recount2 gene expression compendium [@doi:10.1038/nbt.3838] to develop a model that shares information across multiple tissues and diseases, including rare diseases with limited sample sizes.
PASNet [@doi:10.1186/s12859-018-2500-z] uses data from MSigDB to inform the structure of a neural network for predicting patient outcomes in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) from gene expression data.
This approach has the added benefit of straightforward interpretation, as pathway nodes in the network having high weights can be inferred to correspond to important pathways in GBM outcome prediction.

Alternatively, gene-level relationships can take the form of a network.
Nodes in these networks typically represent genes, and real-valued edges in these networks may represent interactions or correlations between genes, often in a tissue or cell type context of interest.
netNMF-sc [@doi:10.1101/544346] incorporates coexpression networks [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkw868] as a smoothing term to perform dimension reduction and impute dropouts in single-cell gene expression data.
The authors show that using a coexpression network to extract a low-dimensional representation increases performance for cell type identification and identification of cell cycle marker genes, both as compared to using raw gene expression data and as compared to other single-cell dimension reduction methods.
Combining gene expression data with a network-derived smoothing term has also been shown to improve performance at predicting patient drug response in acute myeloid leukemia [@arxiv:1906.10670] and at detecting mutated cancer genes [@doi:10.1038/s41598-017-03141-w].
PIMKL [@doi:10.1038/s41540-019-0086-3] combines network and pathway data to predict disease-free survival from breast cancer cohorts.
This method takes as input both RNA-seq gene expression data and copy number alteration data, but can be applied to gene expression data alone as well.

Gene regulatory networks can also augment models for gene expression data.
These networks describe how the expression of genes is modulated by biological regulators such as transcription factors, microRNAs, or small molecules.
creNET [@doi:10.1038/s41598-018-19635-0] integrates a gene regulatory network, derived from STRING [@doi:10.1093/nar/gku1003], with a sparse logistic regression model to predict phenotypic response in clinical trials for ulcerative colitis and acute kidney rejection based on gene expression data.
The gene regulatory information allows the model to identify the biological regulators that are associated with the response, potentially giving mechanistic insight into differential clinical trial response.
GRRANN [@doi:10.1186/s12859-017-1984-2] uses a gene regulatory network to inform the structure of a neural network, applying it to the same clinical trial data as creNET.
Several other methods [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkx681; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty945] have also used gene regulatory network structure to constrain the structure of a neural network, reducing the number of parameters to be fit by the network and facilitating interpretation of network predictions.

### Applications in genetics

Approaches to incorporating gene set or network structure into genetic studies have a long history (see, e.g. [@doi:10.1093/biostatistics/kxl007; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn081]).
Recent applications of these methods include expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) mapping studies, which aim to identify associations between genetic variants and gene expression.
netReg [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btx677] implements the graph-regularized dual LASSO algorithm described in [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu293] in a publicly available R package, based on an efficient C++ backend.
This model allows for regression coefficients to be smoothed simultaneously based on networks describing associations between genes (target variables in the eQTL regression model) and variants (predictors in the eQTL regression model).
eQTL information can also be used in conjunction with genetic variant information to predict phenotypes, in an approach known as Mendelian randomization (MR).
In [@doi:10.1111/biom.13072], a smoothing term derived from a gene regulatory network was used as a component in an MR model.
When applied to a human liver cohort data set, the model with the network smoothing term was shown to more robustly identify genes that influence enzyme activity than an MR model that does not consider network interactions.
As genetic datasets become larger, efficient methods for gene and genetic variant selection will become even more important, and it is likely that researchers will continue to develop methods that leverage gene set and network databases for this purpose.
