## Network- and pathway-based models

Rather than operating on sequences, many machine learning models in biomedicine operate on inputs that lack intrinsic order.
Models may make use of gene expression data matrices from RNA sequencing or microarray experiments in which rows represent samples and columns represent genes.
To account for relationships between genes, one might incorporate known interactions or correlations when making predictions or generating a low-dimensional representation of the data (Figure {@fig:network_models}).
This is comparable to the manner in which sequence context pushes models to consider nearby base pairs similarly.

![
    The relationships between genes provide structure that can be incorporated into machine learning models.
    One common approach is to use a network or collection of gene sets to embed the data in a lower-dimensional space, in which genes that are in the same gene sets or that are well-connected in the network have a similar representation in the lower-dimensional space.
    The embedded data can then be used for classification or clustering tasks.
    The "x" values in the data table represent gene expression measurements.
](images/network_models_revised.svg){#fig:network_models .white}

### Applications in transcriptomics

Models built from gene expression data can benefit from incorporating gene-level relationships.
One form that this knowledge commonly takes is a database of gene sets, which may represent biological pathways or gene signatures for a biological state of interest.
PLIER [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0456-1] uses gene set information from MSigDB [@doi:10.1073/pnas.0506580102] and cell type markers to extract a representation of gene expression data that corresponds to biological processes and reduces technical noise.
The resulting gene set-aligned representation accurately decomposed cell type mixtures.
MultiPLIER [@doi:10.1016/j.cels.2019.04.003] applied PLIER to the recount2 gene expression compendium [@doi:10.1038/nbt.3838] to develop a model that shares information across multiple tissues and diseases, including rare diseases with limited sample sizes.
PASNet [@doi:10.1186/s12859-018-2500-z] uses MSigDB to inform the structure of a neural network for predicting patient outcomes in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) from gene expression data.
This approach aids interpretation, as pathway nodes in the network with high weights can be inferred to correspond to certain pathways in GBM outcome prediction.

Gene-level relationships can also be represented with networks.
Network nodes typically represent genes and real-valued edges may represent interactions or correlations between genes, often in a tissue or cell type context of interest.
Network-based stratification [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.2651] is an early example of a method for utilizing gene interaction network data in this manner, applied to improve subtyping across several cancer types.
More recently, netNMF-sc [@doi:10.1101/544346] incorporates coexpression networks [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkw868] as a smoothing term for dimension reduction and dropout imputation in single-cell gene expression data.
The coexpression network improves performance for identifying cell types and cell cycle marker genes, as compared to using raw gene expression or other single-cell dimension reduction methods.
Combining gene expression data with a network-derived smoothing term also improved prediction of patient drug response in acute myeloid leukemia [@arxiv:1906.10670] and detection of mutated cancer genes [@doi:10.1038/s41598-017-03141-w].
PIMKL [@doi:10.1038/s41540-019-0086-3] combines network and pathway data to predict disease-free survival from breast cancer cohorts.
This method takes as input both RNA-seq gene expression data and copy number alteration data, but can also be applied to gene expression data alone.

Gene regulatory networks can also augment models for gene expression data.
These networks describe how the expression of genes is modulated by biological regulators such as transcription factors, microRNAs, or small molecules.
creNET [@doi:10.1038/s41598-018-19635-0] integrates a gene regulatory network, derived from STRING [@doi:10.1093/nar/gku1003], with a sparse logistic regression model to predict phenotypic response in clinical trials for ulcerative colitis and acute kidney rejection.
The gene regulatory information allows the model to identify the biological regulators associated with the response, potentially giving mechanistic insight into differential clinical trial response.
GRRANN [@doi:10.1186/s12859-017-1984-2], which was applied to the same data as creNET, uses a gene regulatory network to inform the structure of a neural network.
Several other methods [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkx681; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty945] have also used gene regulatory network structure to constrain the structure of a neural network, reducing the number of parameters to be fit and facilitating interpretation.

### Applications in genetics

Approaches that incorporate gene set or network structure into genetic studies have a long history [@doi:10.1093/biostatistics/kxl007; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn081].
Recent applications include expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) mapping studies, which aim to identify associations between genetic variants and gene expression.
netReg [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btx677] implements a graph-regularized dual LASSO algorithm for eQTL mapping [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu293] in a publicly available R package.
This model smooths regression coefficients simultaneously based on networks describing associations between genes (target variables in the eQTL regression model) and between variants (predictors in the eQTL regression model).
eQTL information is also used in conjunction with genetic variant information to predict phenotypes, in an approach known as Mendelian randomization (MR).
In [@doi:10.1111/biom.13072], a smoothing term derived from a gene regulatory network is used in an MR model.
The model with the network smoothing term, applied to a human liver dataset, more robustly identifies genes that influence enzyme activity than a network-agnostic model.
As genetic datasets grow, we expect that researchers will continue to develop models that leverage gene set and network databases.
